docs/tasks/15.md, before:

Add way to adjust color scales used by aesthetics.
A color palette editor is used to edit the palettes used by any aesthetics that use color, both continuous and categorical
Aesthetic settings occur in their own tool bar below the controls bar (which is below the tab bar).
Next to each aesthetic dropdown between the label and the dropdown is a small square button with an edit icon that when clicked opens up the aesthetics settings.
When an aesthetic settings is open, the dive with the settings dropdown (label, edit button, and dropdown) is underlined the same way control tabs are.
Clicking anywhere in the tabs or other control bar closes the aesthetics settings toolbar, but manipulating the tree does not.
This behavior is uniform for any settings in the third toolbar div.

## Color palette editor

A box with a gradient should be shown.
Above the gradient, there should be squares for each color in the color palette centered over ticks extending down to the gradient box that indicate where the source colors for the palette fall on the gradient.
Clicking on a square should open a color picker to edit the color of that square.
Clicking and holding a square should allow the color to be dragged to a new position in the palette order.
Colors are always equally spaced on the gradient.
Below the gradient box is a box with two sliders representing a minimum and maximum proportion of the color gradient to use, the handles of which are boxes with the color correponding to their current position.
To both the right and left of the gradient box are two buttons (two on both sides) one with a plus icon and one with a minus icon.
When a plus button is clicked a color is added to the color palette on the side of the gradient the button is on.
When a minus button is clicked the color on the sides the button is on is deleted from the palette.

To the right of all of the above there should be a short box of the same vertical dimensions and position as the color gradient box that displays the color used for missing data.
Clicking on this gradient should open a color picker to change this color.
Below this, in line with the range selection slider, is a red X icon.

## Continuous color aesthetic editor

A color palette editor should be placed first (on the left).
In addition there should be controls for:

- The minimum input value range.
- The maximum input value range.
- The number of significant figures to use on the legend tick labels
- The title of the legend
- The contents of the units label that appears under the legend
- A toggle that when activated, causes inputs values outside the range of the color gradient to be treated as missing data.


## Categorical color aesthetic editor

A color palette editor should be placed first (on the left).
In addition there should be controls for:

- The maximum number of colors to show before collapsing additonal categories to other
- A color box used to select which color is used for the "other" category
- A dropdown to select how categories are sorted with the following options:
  - frequency (default)
  - alphabetic
  - occurance: the order they occur in the input data
- a toggle that when activated causes category labels to be modified for display

Commit message:

add controls for legend text and max colors

docs/tasks/15.md, after:

Add way to adjust color scales used by aesthetics.
A color palette editor is used to edit the palettes used by any aesthetics that use color, both continuous and categorical
Aesthetic settings occur in their own tool bar below the controls bar (which is below the tab bar).
Next to each aesthetic dropdown between the label and the dropdown is a small square button with an edit icon that when clicked opens up the aesthetics settings.
When an aesthetic settings is open, the dive with the settings dropdown (label, edit button, and dropdown) is underlined the same way control tabs are.
Clicking anywhere in the tabs or other control bar closes the aesthetics settings toolbar, but manipulating the tree does not.
This behavior is uniform for any settings in the third toolbar div.

## Color palette editor

A box with a gradient should be shown.
Above the gradient, there should be squares for each color in the color palette centered over ticks extending down to the gradient box that indicate where the source colors for the palette fall on the gradient.
Clicking on a square should open a color picker to edit the color of that square.
Clicking and holding a square should allow the color to be dragged to a new position in the palette order.
Colors are always equally spaced on the gradient.
Below the gradient box is a box with two sliders representing a minimum and maximum proportion of the color gradient to use, the handles of which are boxes with the color correponding to their current position.
To both the right and left of the gradient box are two buttons (two on both sides) one with a plus icon and one with a minus icon.
When a plus button is clicked a color is added to the color palette on the side of the gradient the button is on.
When a minus button is clicked the color on the sides the button is on is deleted from the palette.

To the right of all of the above there should be a short box of the same vertical dimensions and position as the color gradient box that displays the color used for missing data.
Clicking on this gradient should open a color picker to change this color.
Below this, in line with the range selection slider, is a red X icon.

## Continuous color aesthetic editor

A color palette editor should be placed first (on the left).
In addition there should be controls for:

- The minimum input value range.
- The maximum input value range.
- The number of significant figures to use on the legend tick labels
- The title of the legend
- The contents of the units label that appears under the legend
- A toggle that when activated, causes inputs values outside the range of the color gradient to be treated as missing data.


## Categorical color aesthetic editor

A color palette editor should be placed first (on the left).
In addition there should be controls for:

- The maximum number of colors to show before collapsing additonal categories to other
- A color box used to select which color is used for the "other" category
- A dropdown to select how categories are sorted with the following options:
  - frequency (default)
  - alphabetic
  - occurance: the order they occur in the input data
- The title of the legend
- The contents of the units label that appears under the legend
- a toggle that when activated causes category labels to be modified for display
